How to measure value of work. This development is most apparent on the internet, where various mechanisms exist to measure digital content popularity (a good proxy for their value). As a consequence, multi-billion dollar companies like Google and Facebook have quickly emerged, profiting by selling usage data to advertising companies. A similar scenario is unfolding in the domain of physical objects, where using sensors, various physical properties are converted into digital data. It can be expected that in the near future everyday objects like tools, packaging or apparel will contain miniature devices capable of measuring usage, creating ad-hoc peer-to-peer networks and transfering measured data for processing into data centers, or processing them directly within the network. 

These advances are openning up an opportunity to create a new economic system, capable of distributing rewards directly to all types of value creators, including volunteers, whose work has been so far economically "invisible", but socially important. However, a prerequisite to making these technological advances improve lives of all people is to change the way work rewards are distributed. This is by no means a new problem, and many great thinkers devoted sizable - and so far unsuccessful - effort into solving it, which does not offer much hope for a quick relief. There is however one factor that is changing rapidly and it is again technology. Fast and ubiquitous networking, dramatic reduction of cost and increases in power of computing devices are enabling not only our ability to measure usage, but are also opening up new ways to manipulate this new information. One example is how computer networks have been enabling  

 peer-to-peer networks are going to solve also this problem. 

 various community currencies iniciatives, whose goal is to provide a fair value exchange in local economies. Their proliferation in the recent years Many of them have been serving their users for several decades are experiencing renesance, enabled by the internet and lately mobile computing. 

Another example comes from the financial sector, where peer to peer technology is used to create cryptocurrencies like bitcoin, with one of the promises to remove fees from financial transactions. Even more recently, ability to directly measure usage is leading to development of collaborative solutions for tracking individual contributions of value creators participating on the process of product or services creation in iniciatives like Open Value Network[zzz], Maidsafe[zz1] and others. Common to all of these initiatives is their tendency to replace middlemen of the existing economy with algorithms running on a network with global reach, shifting reward for produced value towards it's creators in the process.
