The merit economy

Introduction

"..Now it is true that the needs of human beings may seem to be insatiable. But they fall into two classes – those needs which are absolute in the sense that we feel them whatever the situation of our fellow human beings may be, and those which are relative in the sense that we feel them only if their satisfaction lifts us above, makes us feel superior to, our fellows. Needs of the second class, those which satisfy the desire for superiority, may indeed be insatiable; for the higher the general level, the higher still are they. But this is not so true of the absolute needs - a point may soon be reached, much sooner perhaps than we are all of us aware of, when these needs are satisfied in the sense that we prefer to devote our further energies to non-economic purposes..."

John M. Keynes, Economic Possibilities for our Grandchildren




This paper presents framework for a new economic model (NEO), built upon results of research about effects of remuneration on worker motivation and incorporating ideas and experiences from two existing non-capitalist economic systems - the volunteer economy and Timebanking.

There are two observations in particular that served as inspiration for the new model:

1. Behavioral economics research shows, that emotional happiness rises with increasing income only up to a certain country-specific level ($75,000 in the USA)[1]. Further income increases either do not contribute to growth of happiness or have the opposite effect.

2. Every year, more than a billion people from around the world work for free, to produce socially beneficial output. In the process they generate value, that would place a hypothetical country inhabited by volunteers 7th on a list of the most GDP-producing economies[2].
 

From these and other observations an inference can be made, that once their basic material needs are satisfied, people loose interest to work for material reward, if that can not buy recognition from society. A related observation is, that people will work without material compensation, if their work is used and appreciated by other people. Based on these ideas, the economic model proposed here rewards pro-social aspect of work by a non-material score, while establishing a natural limit on the size of material compensation a worker can receive. Thus - in contrast to the remuneration mechanism of capitalist economic system (wage) - in NEO, work reward consists of two separate types:

1. effort - for the number of hours spent by workers to create a good or service (asset). This reward can be exchanged for other assets.
2. impact - a numerical score, equal to the total sales revenue from an asset made by the rewarded worker. This reward is a reflection of individual worker abilities, therefore can't be traded for goods or services.

The proposed model further postulates:
a. workers are materially rewarded only for effort and not for impact,
b. the amount of  material reward received is independent of the work type (equality of effort),
c. The part of revenue remaining after workers are rewarded for effort (profit) is distributed equally to all NEO participants as Universal distribution.

It is envisioned, that NEO rules will be implemented as and enforced by a set of algorithms, running on global, decentralized computing platform.

Discussion

In 1930, in his essay "Economic Possibilities for our Grandchildren" John M. Keynes [37] described a vision of the world economy "hundred years hence", where most labor is done by machines, the economic problem solved and human interests focused to "live wisely and agreeably and well". Fifteen years remain to the onset of the hypothetical new era and due to the rapid advances in technology, the vision no longer seems unattainable. It is becoming clear, that it is not the inadequacy of technology, or the lack of resources that present the last obstacle to fulfill the vision. The final roadblock concerns the existing property rights, inadequate for an era, where the need for human labor is rapidly disappearing from the production processes.

1. Economic inequality

The World Economic Forum identified growing income inequality as one of the most pressing problems facing the world economy today, concerning not only the world economy, but the social order as well [14] [45]. The solutions of the problem presented to date have been primarily focused on redistribution of income or wealth through taxation [3], or policy changes [44][48], which for many reasons are encountering opposition. Analysis of the relation between worker motivation and income however sugest a new approach to the problem.

A recent work by DeVoe et al. [30] shows, that income from labor - in addition to providing exchange value, is perceived by the rewarded workers as a measure of their competence. The authors show, that the intensity of work effort is driven by desire to maximize the competence signal, not to capture maximum of the exchange value. Data from a real-world survey, as well as laboratory experiments performed by the authors also confirmed, that income from capital, or other non-labor sources that lack the competence signaling component, do not have the motivational power of income from own work. Another evidence of importance of the competence signaling function comes from a study by Clark et al. [52]. It confirms, that the exchange value of income is of secondary concern for workers, as they are willing to increase effort even for a lower (exchange) reward, if they can achieve higher rank in their peer group [51].

The model of worker motivation emerging from these and similar findigs presents a new kind of answer to the question of the origin of income inequality. In capitalist system, the competence signaling function of reward is inseparable from its exchange function and therefore any attempt to reward competence, necessarily grants the rewarded worker the exchange reward as well. However, DeVoe et al. [30] found, that increases of the amount of the competence signal-containing reward make workers value the reward more, which leads them to step-up their work effort. The most rewared workers thus tend to acquire more reward, explaining the escalating flow of incomes into the top brackets of the pay distribution.

A solution to this problem is suggested by the different attitude of workers towards the two functions of remuneration. A new reward mechanism, where exchange value of reward is separated from the competence signaling measure would allow setting the measure as high as necessary, while keeping the exchange reward amount commensurable with the worker's actual effort. In such an arrangement, the likely principal reason driving accummulation of capital into an increasingly narrow segment of population would be eliminated, while keeping the motivational forces that give capitalism its dynamic character, intact.

A proposal to reward workers with non-exchangeable measure for competence is undoubtedly controversial. However, in addition to the above-cited research, another proof of viability of such a reward scheme can be seen in the existence of the volunteer "economy", where every year more than a billion people worldwide are willingly exchanging labor for pure competence-signaling reward. Lastly, in a world, where human physical attributes, or material possessions are for any reason unusable as carriers of  status or competence signals, new measures are needed to satisfy our fundamental psychological and social needs [33]. For example on the internet, the problem of non-existent physicality [53] as a carrier of social signaling gave rise to a wide range of new measures not exchangeable for goods or services, like reputation rankings, facebook likes, badges, e.t.c..

2. Profit and reward

A hypotehtical economy, where the exchange and competence signaling functions exist separately can be studied by analyzing two existing unorthodox economic systems, that implement reward systems with only one of these functions.

The trillion dollars volunteer economy [2] is a system, where workers are rewarded for their labor with a pure competence-signaling reward. The form of the reward varies for different types of services. For example, in the open source application development, competence might be signaled by the number of application installations, while in more traditional activities like community development work, volunteers are rewarded by gratitude expressed by the service recipients. In all cases, the size of the reward reflects utility of the created product or service rendered. The global presence of this economy and the signifficant value it generates every year should be seen as a testament to the power of pure competence reward.

Example of a system with reward having only the exchange value function is Timebanking [34] - a type of complementary currency - where one hour of work of any kind earns one time credit, exchangeable for an hour of another worker's work. For example, one hour of a doctor's work is considered equal in value to one hour of gardener's work. The model of worker motivation built upon the results of behavior research however predicts, that due to the absence of the competence signaling function in the reward, economies of this kind should not in general be viable in the long-term. A Timebanking study by Shih et al. [35] confirms this prediction. It found an over time decreasing participation of timebank members, reluctance of higly-skilled members to trade their work for time credits and other issues. 

Yet, time-based remuneration is the base of not only alternative economic systems like Timebanking, but in certain contexts of the mainstream ones as well. For example, the capitalist remuneration is not different from Timebanking, when workers have the same type and level of expertise. In that case, any differences in rewards recevied by different workers are attributable exclusively to the amount of their effort, measured by the length of work time. Therefore in systems, where competence is rewarded separately, any type of work performed with the same effort (taking the same length of time) has equal exchange value.

These examples show, that a remuneration mechanism, that combines utility-based competence signaling reward with a separate time-based exchange reward, should - in the worker motivation domain - be equivalent to the capitalist system. It can be expected, that similar to the capitalist reward mechanism, also this new form of remuneration would motivate workers to maximize revenues from sales of the assets they make, as they are also the measure of utility of the asset, and therefore the workers' competence. The drive to maximize competence reward should lead to production of profit. That raises a question about who should be recipient of the exchange value of profit, as the workers in a dual-reward economy only receive exchange reward equal to the number of their worked hours.

The answer to this question has two parts. The first can be found in the work of Sraffa [42], who has shown, that assets gain their distinctive form and function exclusively from labor - either direct, or indirect - "contained" in the factors of production used to make the assets. The direct labor can be measured directly by the number of work hours. The source of indirect labor from the factors of production can be revealed by noticing, that the factors of production themselves are assets, which were in the past also made by labor and other factors of production. By applying recursion, a series of terms is produced, which represent labor contributions from all of the workers, whose work made the existence of the analyzed assets possible [43]. If human labor is considerd to be an instance of a larger class of matter-forming forces, the recursive procedure must include also terms from "work" of geological processes that created mineral deposits, the energy of the Sun that gives existence to forests or marine life, or the cosmological forces responsible for existence of our planetary system.

The second part of the answer concerns the fact, that according to the definition of the concept, profit was created by the work of workers from the series who have not been rewarded as well as by the unacounted-for natural resources-forming energy. Those workers however can't be rewarded, as most of them have been dead for a long time and the natural processes do not have an owner. It is therefore reasonable to consider the exchange value of profit to be a part of cultural inheritance of mankind and distribute it equally among all people [54].

Such perspective however, clashes with our assumptions about property rights (and therefore also profit ownership). Those assumptions according to Eswaran and Neary [28] are part of an old survival mechanism, that evolved under competition for scarce resources, one of which is the right to own resources developed by own labor. In capitalism, this right is manifested by the appropriation of profits by the individuals who produced them - either directly by own labor, or indirectly as owners of capital. Our evolution-formed assumptions about individual property rights however lose their validity, when economic and social stability of whole groups of people is at stake. Various types of taxes levied on income and personal property by governments of all historic periods and economic systems are in a direct contradiction to our assumptions about ownership rights to value developed by own labor.

The profit ownership problem can be solved by a new model of property rights accounting for the fact, that work reward provides the recipients with two kinds of values. The competence signaling measure of profit (its numerical value) should belong to the workers who created it and its exchange value should be distributed among all people. This interpretation of property rights should address the research-identified source of worker motivation and at the same time provide funding for an equal and universal distribution scheme like basic income [9].

Description of NEO

In this section a framework of a new economic system (NEO) is presented, incorporating the remuneration and property rights ideas discussed in the preceding section. The system assumes most of the institutions of the capitalist system, therefore only new rules and supporting concepts are described, followed by description of several typical scenarios. The goal is to provide just enough information to illustrate how the new rules could function in an economy. 

The infrastructure

In a departure from the capitalist system, which relies on its actors to know and follow the economy rules, in NEO these are encoded into a software aplication ("Rovas" [5]), as algorithmization and implementation of the economy rules into software eases participation in the economy for the economy actors and prevents rules violation as well. In addition to economy rules, Rovas also implements interfaces that allow the NEO participants to perform various tasks, like creating projects, entering work reports, paying for purchases, e.t.c. Interfaces are available also for enabling programmatic access to the Rovas-stored data and functions. To ensure robustness and uninterrupted availability of services and prevent the possibility of direct human intervention, the software is deployed on a global, distributed computing platform, consisting of networked computers (nodes) owned by the economy participants (built, or modeled upon [24] or [25]). In other words, personal data is owned by the economy participants and no actor has privileged access to the system. From the governance point of view, development of the application follows the open source philosophy.

The economy actors

Any person wanting to participate in the NEO economy can create a Rovas account. The registration process - among other requirements - ensures, that the applicant has exactly one account. Biometric information is also collected, to support various usage scenarios where ease of use and/or security concerns need to be addressed (authentication, payments authorization...).

Chron - the NEO currency

Based on the consclusions made in the Discussion section, the NEO remuneration mechanism calls for existence of two types of rewards, with two corresponding measures. The carrier of exchange value is a new digital currency called "Chron," with ten Chrons equal to one hour of "average" work effort [26]. Chrons are created by Rovas, whenever a good or service is sold, as at that moment new value is created in the economy. The amount of Chrons created is in general equal to the revenues from sales, albeit a portion of the new Chrons are created in advance, as will be shown in the section describing the NEO economy rules.

The NEO currency stability is maintained by keeping supply of Chrons equal to the amount of value in the economy. This means, that as assets loose value over time, certain amount of Chrons must be removed from circulation. Measuring value loss is however practically impossible, therefore an indirect method is used. It is based on an assumption, that whenever a personal account is closed (for example due to the owner death), the "lifetime" economic value created by that person disappears from the economy. Considering, that the total economic value generated by an individual equals the number of the worker's competence signaling points (discussed in the next section) and Chrons are also issued for new value in the same amount as the competence signaling points, an amount of Chrons equal to the number of signaling points attached to a closed account is removed from circulation.

Merit - the competence measure

The size of a work reward, in addition to being the determinand of the value the reward can be exchanged for, is perceived by its recipients also as signal of their competence. In the NEO reward mechanism, the competence signaling reward is expressed by a new measure, with units called "Merit". Like Chrons, Merits too are created when new value is created in the economy, therefore the amount of Chrons circulating in the economy is always equal to the number of Merits awarded to all NEO workers. Merits can't be gifted, or exchanged for goods or services, as they are a measure of workers' abilities. Merit scores of the economy participants are publicly accessible, alongside the information about the assets, for whose values they were granted.

General NEO account

In addition to personal accounts, there is a special account in Rovas, used by the NEO rules for purposes that include temporary storage of Chrons before they are distributed to the economy actors, or storage of unclaimed Merits.

Remuneration rules in NEO

The rules described here assume a simple economy, where workers interact with Rovas directly, as individuals. It is expected, that rules governing activity of firms and other types of institutions will be derived from the basic principles of the NEO economy and the rules described in this section.

A note about transactions: NEO allows direct transactions between the economy actors using Chrons. In that scenario, none of the NEO rules are in effect and one of the consequences is, that no competence reward is awarded. In effect, the transacting parties are operating in a capitalist economy, using the NEO currency. To earn Merits, the economy participants must sell assets through Rovas-provided interfaces.

In NEO, workers are rewarded by Rovas with 10 Chrons for every hour worked. In order to receive a payment for their labor and the means of production costs, they must submit a report to Rovas, containing among other information the ID number of the project for which the work was performed along with the number of hours worked. If the desired project has no record yet in Rovas (and therefore no project ID), the project owner must create it first, using the Rovas-provided interface. 

The revenues from sales of assets might fall into one of 3 ranges with different reward allocation rules. The ranges boundaries are:

A. no revenues
B. revenues equal to labor costs
C. revenues equal to labor costs plus the means of production costs
D. revenues exceeding all costs

Range 1 - the revenues do not exceed the labor costs

If workers are interested in an advance payment for their work, they must not only send a work report as described above, but also fulfill two additinal requirements - to pass the "number of worked hours check" and prove existence of the asset. The number of worked hours check is performed by Rovas, by calculating the average number of hours per day for the reported period. If the calculated number is smaller than 8 hours on average (more for shorter periods and less for longer periods), the test is considered passed.

The second condition intends to prove existence of the asset made. That process in general relies on one or more NEO participants confirming the new asset's existence. With the currently available technology, such a person would launch on their (mobile) computer the "NEO application", scan a QR code encoding URL of a special confirmation page for the asset in Rovas, read the description of the asset there and confirm or deny the asset's existence. Considering, that the confirming actors themselves are performing work, they receive a fixed amount of Chrons and Merits as a reward for their effort. Once the asset existence is confirmed, Rovas creates new Chrons and an equal number of Merits for the labor time the asset creator reported. The Chrons are deposited into that worker's account and an equal amount of Chrons is substracted from the general NEO account ballance [56]. The new Merits are held in the general NEO account until the worker sells the new asset. Only then the value of the asset's utility is revealed and the Merits can be transferred into the worker's account. Chrons received from sale of the asset are deposited into the general NEO account, where they are used to liquidate the debit caused by the advance payment.

The need for paying workers in advance is a consequence of one of the fundamental principles of the NEO economy - the separation of exchange and competence signaing rewards - which dictates, that all effort (labor time) must be rewarded equally, regardless of the work output value. Additional reasons why workers receive the advance payment for their work are:

1. issuing exchange reward in advance solves a bootstrapping problem, most obvious when NEO economy is launched. At that moment, no assets could be purchased, as no Chrons exist yet.
2. work with no apparent use often plays positive role indirectly, for example as a source of (negative) experience other workers consider, when producing more successful work.
3. an asset may acquire value only after a signifficant delay, when the worker who created it can't be rewarded any more. 


Range 2

For revenues that are equal to or exceed the labor costs, but are less than the sum of all input costs, NEO has different reimbursement rules, that depend on the origin of the means of production used. While the cost of the means of production originating in NEO (that have NEO project ID) is reimbursed to the asset-producing workers, they receive no Merits for the value attributable to the means of production. Instead, those Merits are paid to the (indirect) workers who created the means of production (assets). For means of production not made in NEO, that share of Merits is held in the general NEO account, as the means of production creators are unknown. Those Merits are periodically liquidated at a rate equal to the rate at which the economy assets loose value.

Range 3

Lastly, if the revenues from sales exceed all input costs, Rovas generates Merits and Chrons in the amount equal to the profit and distributes them accoring to these rules:

1. Merits are divided between the direct workers and the creators of the means of production used to make the sold asset. The share which each of these groups receive is by default proportional to their share of input costs. Thus, for example the direct workers receive:

MeritsW = P * (Lc / (MPc+Lc))

...and the means of production creators receive:

MeritsMP = P * (MPc / (MPc+Lc))

where:
MeritsW - Number of Merits paid to workes who provided direct labor
MeritsMP - Number of Merits paid to workes who created the means of production
P - The value generated by the asset sale (equal to profit)
Lc - the direct labor costs
MPc - the means of production costs

When purchasing an asset for use as means of production, buyers can negotiate with the sellers to share any future potential competence reward using other than the default - based on the sale price - credit allocation. If this is the case, the sales record for the sold asset must contain information about the agreed-upon share.

If the means of production creators can't be identified, their share of Merits is again deposited into the general NEO account and over time liquidated as mentioned above.

2. Chrons from profits are deposited into the general NEO account, where they are used to cancel any debits from advances paid to workers, if the assets they made did not generate enough sales to cover the labor costs. Any remaining Chrons are periodically and equally distributed among all NEO participants as the Universal Distribution.

The following examples illustrate the basic concepts and functions of NEO.

Example 1: An entrepreneur creating a web application.

An entrepreneur starts work by creating new project in Rovas, by providing information like the name of the project, description, choice of monetizing model e.t.c.. Upon submitting, Rovas generates unique project (asset) ID and associates it with the entrepreneur's ID. As she works on the project, the entrepreneur may record her work time, or do so upon reaching some milestone. Recording work time is not necessary, if she is interested only in the competence reward - as is the case on volunteer projects. If third party tools are needed, she will purchase them and record their asset IDs together with the portion of their value used in production. For means of production made outside the NEO economy, the entrepreneur will record only the portion of their value used up in creating the web application.

In order to record sales, the entrepreneur will embed special code into the web application, allowing communication with Rovas to process payments received from users, and/or to record the web application usage. When ready to start selling, the entrepreneur updates the project in Rovas with that information. If our entrepreneur wants advance payment for her work hours, she embeds a Rovas-provided code, that renders a block in her application, containing text, inviting visitors to earn a reward by confirm existence of the web application. Clicking on a button or hyperlink in that block will show a Rovas-rendered page, where the visitors will see the number of hours reported by the web application developer and a means (button, hyperlink) to confirm or deny the application existence. Rovas will record the choice and if a predetermined number of visitors confirms, reward will be sent to the confirming visitors and the block will be hidden from the web application to prevent more confirmations than necessary. Rovas then checks that the number of work hours reported for the reported time period is realistic - not violating constraints dictated by human biology. If that step is successful, Chrons for labor are created and deposited into the entrepreneur's account.

Lastly, the entrepreneur will have to choose a suitable monetizing strategy. Any of the strategies common in the capitalist economy can be used. For example, in a "paywall" scenario, the buyer authenticates into Rovas [20] and confirms payment. The web application will send a transaction into Rovas containing ID of the buyer, together with project ID. The Chrons from the buyer's account (managed by Rovas) are transferred into the general NEO account and the buyer is granted access into the application.

To provide a more concrete picture of the rewards distribution, let's suppose the entrepreneur invested 100 hours of labor into creating the web application, which is equivalent to 1,000 Chrons and paid 100 Chrons for a program module with a specific functionality, needed in the web application. The total cost of web application is then 1,100 Chrons. Let's further assume, that the buyers collectively paid 20,000 Chrons for accessing the web application. Rovas distributes the rewards in the following way:

• the entrepreneur will receive 1,000 Chrons as an advance payment and once the web application generates enough sales, 100 Chrons to cover the costs. She will also receive 20,000 - 100 = 19,900 Merits for the contribution of her labor to the produced value.
• the software module creator will receive 100 Merits, which is the default competence signaling reward distribution, based on the input costs. If the module creator and the web application developer have negotiated a different distribution of Merits, that agreed-upon formula would be used instead.
• The general NEO account will be credited with 20,000 Chrons from which 1,000 will be used to cancel the advance payment made to our entrepreneur and 100 Chrons will be transfered to her personal account to cover the module cost. The remaining 18,900 Chrons will be used to cancel any un-repaid advances made to other NEO workers and the rest will be divided among the economy participants as Universal Distribution.

If the entrepreneur would have choosen a "pay as much as you want" payment model, the web application visitor/consumer could either make a voluntary payment immediately within the application, or use it without paying. In that case, NEO will periodically send notification to the consumers that a new usage statement is  available. The statement - acessible in the Rovas application - will contain listing of all assets sold under the "pay as much as you want" payment model, that the account holder had consumed but not paid for. The consumer could choose to pay separately for every good or service listed, or specify an arbitrarily high amount for all unpaid items, leaving it up to Rovas to distribute the payments.


Example 2: A team of workers creating physical goods

A company owned and run by Jane, Mary and Bill produces sandwiches and resells them through a network of merchants. When starting the business, they made an agreement to divide any competence reward from sales to 5 parts, with Bill receiving one and Jane and Mary 2 parts each, to reflect their individual value contributions. With the help of technology, they make 100 sandwiches in 1 hour, from 20 Chrons worth of ingredients. Other costs (amortization of machines, electricity...) contribute 0.1 Chron per sandwich. The total input costs per sandwich is 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 = 0.6 Chrons. The average sandwich price to the merchants is 1.5 Chrons. The company software sends periodically accounting information into Rovas, which issues Chron and Merit rewards to the workers' accounts. For one 8-hour day each of them earns 80 Chrons for labor and the total 1,200  Merits from sale of the 800 sandwiches get divided among the workers according to the agreed-upon formula: 240 Merits for Bill and 480 Merits for Jane and Mary each. From the sales revenues, Rovas deposits 240 Chrons a day into the company account to reimburse the non-labor costs. The 720 Chrons remaining is deposited into the general NEO account. 

In this scenario, the workers would opt out from receiving advance payments, as sales and therefore full work reward distributions are made every day.

It should also be noted, that in a marked departure from the capitalist model, the firm does not receive the profits, that in capitalism are often used to fund future business plans. In NEO, capital for business investments must be acquired from company employees individually or from outside investors as profits belong to all NEO participants.

Example 3: Investing Chrons to earn Merits

This last example illustrates how the NEO participants can convert Chrons into Merits. This is possible to do, by investing into businesses, in exchange for a share of equity. However, unlike in the capitalist system, where gains from such investments combine exchange as well as competence signaling functions, in NEO investors receive only competence reward. The exact portion of Merits received is determined by negotiations between the investors and the entrepreneurs and the resulting agreed-upon distribution formula is used by Rovas to allocate the competence reward.

Converting Chrons into Merits by investing does not violate the principle of non-tradability of Merits, as the Chron holders must use their market knowledge to identify potentially successful enterprises, thus contesting their competence. Investing caries a real possibility of losing investments, therefore investors are not simply buying Merits. For the same reason, trades of Chrons for other non-NEO currencies, that might lead to profit generation are not violating any NEO principles.

Conclusion

To date, none of the many proposals (for example [54], [58], socialism), aimed at addressing the problems of capitalism [59] have been succesful. It is therefore not unreasonable, to question viability of the economic model presented in this paper. Particularly problematic might be perceived the challenges, the new economy presents to the traditional assumptions about property rights, and to the established remuneration mechanism. While only an actual implementation of NEO can determine validity of these concerns, there are arguments for why the two founding principles of the new economy might not be a barrier to its adoption.

It can be expected, that NEO will be first adopted by the same people, who today generate value in the 7th world largest - volunteer economy [2]. By merely registering their projects in NEO and presenting them to their consumers as such, volunteers can receive not only an explicit (Merit) reward for their social contribution, but also a share of the exchange value from their own work as well as the work of others. If the NEO economy consisted only from volunteers who by definition are not interested in an exchange reward for their labor, any revenues from potential sales of their assets would be distributed among them as Universal Distribution. The amount of those payments would apparently depend on the willingness of buyers to pay for the volunteer-made assets, but there exist pricing strategies, suitable for this scenario. For example, the "pay what you want" (PWYW) strategy might be a particularly good candidate, as it allows continued free access to the volunteer-made goods or services, while giving them an option to reward the asset creators with their Chrons. Gneezy et al. have shown, [57] that the PWYW payment strategy generates signifficantly more revenues than fixed pricing strategy, when part of the proceeds from sales were promised to be given to a charity. Considering the overall pro-sociall and wealth-sharing character of NEO, a similar behavioral response can be expected also when using the strategy for volunteer-produced goods and services.

Attractivity of the exchange reward and distributions issued in Chrons will however depend on the kind and the selection of goods and services one can buy. The lack of desirable assets is a well-known problem from the complementary curency world (see for example [61]). NEO will solve this problem by allowing Chrons to be traded on foreign exchanges market, which will allow the NEO economic actors to buy assets made in the non-NEO economies. Considering, that one Chron is an expression of a specific unit of labor, the NEO currency should have certain value from the onset. 

Another type of early NEO adopters could be the owners of web properties. The initially likely low Chron exchange rates migth not allow purchases of high-priced assets, but should be sufficient for web application and content providers to accepts payments in Chrons, in exchange for access to their content and services. The attractivity of Universal Distribution, the pro-social aspect of NEO and the possibility of getting paid for hours of work invested into own projects should be sufficiently attractive to internet users, to create NEO accounts. NEO might therefore be the sought-after solution, for the problem faced by web properties owners, whose income from advertisements is increasingly eroded due to use of ad-blocking solutions by the consumers.

Further, it can be expected, that the first to benefit from the guaranteed reward for work and from the Universal Distribution will be the world poorest population. 

Wealthy donors who today are looking for the most effective way to give, should recognize these mechanisms as ideal vehicle for their gifts, considering these facts:

1. Gifts made into NEO will cause creation of new Chrons and Merits, using the exchange rate at the time a gift is made. The Merits will be given to the donor, or assigned to the general NEO account. The new Chrons will be used to either liquidate any outstanding debits on the general NEO account, or fund the Universal Distribution. 

Considering the low living costs in the parts of the world with the poorest population, these people will benefit from even the 

 will be initially gained by the people, living in extreme powerty [60].

2.  there will not be enough assets to be purchased for Chrons.
no middlemen determining the target for investing the gifts
exchange rate multiplier


1. The exchange rates between Chrons and the national currencies will be initially extremely favorable to the later. Therefore even small monetary gifts will cause creation of large amount of new Chrons, which will be used to buy NEO labor.
2. Such gifts will contribute to Chron strenghtening and that will allow the NEO participants to buy more non-NEO made assets. That will attract more workers to the economy. This will lead not only to more assets being available 

 the flow of such funds will naturally gravitate to the people most in need. 




"Milton Friedman argued, that the social responsibility of business was to maximize its profits"


First, desirability of the NEO competence signaling measure by the economic actors is critical for widespread adoption of the new economy. While 

In the currently dominant economic systems, individuals use visual physical attributes (clothing, material possessions, behavior) to make judgements concerning socially important characteristics of other people. In the materially equal world of NEO, the available expressive ability of material posessions might be insuficient for certain 

On the internet, users are accustomed to various forms of user ratings, therefore the Merit score of individual users is likely to be immediately recognized and valued in that domain. Another reason why the internet

NEO 

, Companies and individuals with web businesses will also find that NEO has solutions for some of the long-lasting problems of the internet commerce. One of them is monetization of content. The new economy actors can issue payments of any amount while incurring no or negligible transaction costs


The guaranteed exchange reward for one's labor and the existence of Universal Distribution mechanism should motivate the economy participants 


changing focus from exchange value to the self-development 





first adopters:

• on-line web applications, on-line media companies, service providers, current time banking and other complementary currencies groups.
• low income groups taking advantage of the growing Universal Distribution payments, driven by profits generated by workers from the high-income groups.
• governments, diverting payments into NEO for lowering unemploymnet and rising wages in the legacy economies. Governments in many countries have unemployment elimination programs, often consisting of tax breaks or other incentives to new-job-creating companies. 


challenges:

* Reporting erroneous or false work
* The value of Merit score

Conclusion

Reporting erroneous or false work is a concern, but likely only in the early period of the NEO economy, as even artificially inflated exchange reward should lead to higher inflation and rapid growth of Universal Distribution. At some point its amount will make false reporting, or reporting labor time altogether uninteresting, as the economy actors will fokus on maximizing their Merit scores. And that requires producing useful work.

Appendix A

spreadsheet showing various reward examples

Appendix B

Instituting NEO

From the brief outline of the NEO technological infrastructure follows, that the system is ultimately to be deployed onto one or a combination of the distributed storage/computing platforms currently in development [24], [25]. In the interim period - after publishing this document - a model implementation of Rovas (bootstrap version) will be developed, aiming for the following goals:

1. to make a Rovas implementation available for use by the team developing the production version as an accounting tool, for tracking time and expenses using the NEO economic rules. The collected data will be eventually transferred into the production version of Rovas, once it is running,
2. to implement a live demonstration environment for marketing purposes,
3. to create an environment to enable design of the Rovas interfaces and to test/fine-tune the economy rules.

It is expected, that at some point, Chrons will became tradeable on the existing digital currency exchanges, to allow investors from the "outside" (non-NEO) economies invest into building Rovas, as well as to enable donors to support the initiative by direct giving. A non-profit organization will be established to shelter activities of the team efforts.

Considering the amount of effort being currently funelled into development of digital currencies and global distributed computing platforms, technological aspects of the project seem solvable. A more difficult to answer is question of viability of the proposed economy in the real world. Some of the most obvious concerns are discussed 

[1] Daniel Kahneman, Angus Deaton: High income improves evaluation of life but not emotional well-being - http://www.pnas.org/content/107/38/16489.full.pdf#page=1&view=FitH
[2] Lester M. Salamon, S. Wojciech Sokolowski, Megan A. Haddock: Measuring the economic value of volunteer work globally: concepts, estimates, and a roadmap to the future
[3] Piketty, Capital in the Twenty-First Century
[4] Thomas B. Edsall - Just Right Inequality http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/05/opinion/edsall-just-right-inequality.html
[5] Slovak word "rováš" stands means "tally stick" in english. See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tally_stick
[6] Dan Ariely, Uri Gneezy, George Loewenstein, and Nina Mazar "Large Stakes and Big Mistakes" - http://www.bostonfed.org/economic/wp/wp2005/wp0511.pdf
[7] Time-based currency in wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time-based_currency
[8] Andrew N. Christopher, Barry R. Schlenker - "The impact of perceived material wealth and perceiver personality on first impressions"
[9] Basic income - http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Basic_income
[10] Guaranteed minimum income - http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guaranteed_minimum_income
[11] 178 oxfam briefing paper 20 january 2014 - "WORKING FOR THE FEW; Political capture and economic inequality" http://www.oxfam.org/sites/www.oxfam.org/files/bp-working-for-few-political-capture-economic-inequality-200114-en.pdf
[12] Karl Marx - Das Kapital, Kritik der politischen Ökonomie
[13] Machines - http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine
[14] The Outlook on the Global Agenda 2015 - http://reports.weforum.org/outlook-global-agenda-2015/
[15] Culture - wikipedia entry - http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Culture
[16] possibly because our civilization does not value failure and therefore does not find useful to measure it in the same way it finds useful to measure success.
[17] Creative thoughts as acts of free will: A two-stage formal integration.  Simonton, Dean Keith
Review of General Psychology, Vol 17(4), Dec 2013, 374-383.
[18] "Signaling Status: The Impact of Relative Income on Household
Consumption and Financial Decisions" - http://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/feds/2014/files/201476pap.pdf
[19] Alison Hearn: "Structuring feeling: Web 2.0, online ranking and rating, and the digital ‘reputation’ economy" - http://tinyurl.com/k6889cn
[20] The distributed computing platform Rovas runs on implements a single sign-on mechanism, that should signifficantly ease participation in economic transactions for the economy actors.
[21] National Research Council - "Organizational Linkages: Understanding the Productivity Paradox" (1994) http://www.nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id=2135&page=112
[22] Rational choice theory - http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rational_choice_theory
[23] David T. Lykken, "The genetics of genius" - http://cogprints.org/611/1/genius.html
[24] MaidSafe - http://maidsafe.net/
[25] Ethereum - https://www.ethereum.org/
[26] An hour of moderately heavy human labor equals aproximately 1 megajoule, therefore 1 Chron equals 10 kilojoules. Calculations based on: "Evaluation of Human Work, 3rd Edition", edited by John R. Wilson, Nigel Corlett
[27] Welfare Makes America More Entrepreneurial - http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2015/03/welfare-makes-america-more-entrepreneurial/388598/
[28] Mukesh Eswaran, Hugh M. Neary "An Economic Theory of the Evolutionary Origin of Property Rights" - http://thred.devecon.org/papers/2011/2011-042_Eswaran_An-Economic-Theory.pdf
[29] Emmanuel Saez, Gabriel Zucman - "Wealth inequality in the united states since 1913: evidence from capitalized income tax data"
http://eml.berkeley.edu/~saez/saez-zucmanNBER14wealth.pdf
[30] Sanford E. DeVoe, Jeffrey Pfeffer, Byron Y. Lee - "When does money make money more important? survey and experimental evidence"
http://www-2.rotman.utoronto.ca/facbios/file/DeVoe,%20Pfeffer,%20and%20Lee,%20ILRR.pdf
[31] Joseph E. Fargione, Clarence Lehman, Stephen Polasky
"Entrepreneurs, Chance, and the Deterministic Concentration of Wealth"
http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0020728
[32] George Loewenstein, Drazen Issacharoff - "Source dependence in the Valuation of Objects"
http://www.cmu.edu/dietrich/sds/docs/loewenstein/SourceDependence.pdf
[33] Edward L. Deci, Richard M. Ryan - "Intrinsic Motivation and Self-Determination in Human Behavior"
https://books.google.com/books?id=p96Wmn-ER4QC
[34] Edgar Cahn - "Time Banking: An Idea Whose Time Has Come?"
http://www.yesmagazine.org/new-economy/time-banking-an-idea-whose-time-has-come
[35] Patrick C. Shih, Victoria Bellotti, Kyungsik Han, John M. Carroll - "Unequal Time for Unequal Value: Implications of Differing Motivations for Participation in Timebanking"
http://www.researchgate.net/publication/269519106_Unequal_time_for_unequal_value_Design_implications_of_differing_motivations_for_participation_in_timebanking
[36] Adam Smith - "The Wealth of Nations" (1776)
[37] John Maynard Keynes - "Economic Possibilities for our Grandchildren"
http://www.aspeninstitute.org/sites/default/files/content/upload/Intro_Session1.pdf
[38] https://neo.world/
[39] M3 - Michigan Micro-Mote http://blaauw.eecs.umich.edu/project.php?id=66
[40] Carl Menger - Principles of economics
https://www.mises.org/sites/default/files/Principles%20of%20Economics_5.pdf
[41] Profit (Economics)
http://www.britannica.com/topic/profit
[42] Piero Sraffa - Production of Commodities by Means of Commodities
http://laprimaradice.myblog.it/media/02/02/2829581832.pdf
[43] A likely to be misunderstood factors of production are knowledge and talent, possession of which allows workers to perform a given task faster/better, than less gifted workers. As a consequence, more knowledgeable workers are more productive and argument could be made, that they deserve larger exchange reward. However, knowledge employed in the production process has the attributes and effects of a physical tool - it increases labor productivity and workers must make an investment in order to acquire it. That makes knowledge indistinguishable from other factors of production. Thus also expenses, related to knowledge acquisition (tuition, cost of own study time..) can enter into profit calculation as a costs.
Talent and similar forms of creativity are not the results of the endowed individual's effort. Instead, their existence is caused by random processes, occurrence rate of which increases with the size of human population. Talent can be defined as a measure of usefulness of an individual's domain-specific abilities to the society. Some people however are more talented than others and there are also people whose actions are not useful and even harmful. Considering, that society carries the burden of care for the actions of individuals from the negative part of the "talent spectrum", society should be also benefactor of the positive contributions made by the talented individuals. Thus talent should not be a factor affecting the amount of exchange reward of an individual worker.
[44] Jacob S. Hacker - "The institutional foundations of middle-class democracy"
http://www.policy-network.net/pno_detail.aspx?ID=3998&title=The+institutional+foundations+of+middle-class+democracy
[45] Era Dabla-Norris, Kalpana Kochhar, Nujin Suphaphiphat, Frantisek Ricka, Evridiki Tsounta - "Causes and Consequences of Income Inequality: A Global Perspective"
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/sdn/2015/sdn1513.pdf
[46] Jonathan D. Ostry, Andrew Berg, and Charalambos G. Tsangarides - "Redistribution, Inequality, and Growth"
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/sdn/2014/sdn1402.pdf
[47] N. Gregory Mankiw - "Defending the One Percent"
http://pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/pdfplus/10.1257/jep.27.3.21
[48] Peter Georgescu - "Capitalists, Arise: We Need to Deal With Income Inequality"
http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/09/opinion/sunday/capitalists-arise-we-need-to-deal-with-income-inequality.html?smid=fb-share&_r=2&assetType=opinion
[49] Shannon Pettypiece - "Unintended Consequence of Wal-Mart’s Raise: Unhappy Workers"
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-08-06/an-unintended-consequence-of-wal-mart-pay-raise-unhappy-workers
[50] Patricia Cohen - "A Company Copes With Backlash Against the Raise That Roared"
http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/02/business/a-company-copes-with-backlash-against-the-raise-that-roared.html
[51] From the human psychology point of view, coupling between motivation and the signaling aspect of labor income is in agreement with the Self-determination theory, [33] according to which, competence is one of three fundamental human needs (the other two being authonomy and relatedness), necessary for the experience of a fulfilling and meaningful life.
[52] Andrew E. Clark, David Masclet, Marie-Claire Villeval - "Effort and Comparison Income: Experimental and Survey Evidence"
http://ftp.iza.org/dp2169.pdf
[53] "On the internet, nobody knows you are a dog"
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/On_the_Internet,_nobody_knows_you're_a_dog
[54] C. H. Douglas made a similar argument with the idea of Social Credit.
http://nationalvanguard.org/books/social_credit_by_ch_douglas.pdf
[55] However, initially no Chrons exist and therefore a newly-created asset can not be purchased, which means, that no new Chrons can be created, as the sale price is not known.
[56] It is to be decided, whether advance payments will be paid for the total number of reported labor. Instead of the full amount, a percentage might be paid, reflecting the state of the general NEO account ballance and the amounts of advance requests from other workers. The concrete numbers will be adjusted based on numerical modeling and/or empirical data.
[57] Ayelet Gneezy, Uri Gneezy, Leif D. Nelson, Amber Brown - "Shared Social Responsibility: A Field Experiment in Pay-What-You-Want Pricing and Charitable Giving"
http://www.sciencemag.org/content/329/5989/325.full
[58] Wikipedia - "Complementary currency"
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Complementary_currency
[59] Wikipedia - "Criticism of capitalism"
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Criticism_of_capitalism
[60] Wikipedia - "Extreme powerty"
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extreme_poverty
[61] Clare Lascelles - "Complementary Currencies: Mutual Credit Currency Systems and the Challenge of Globalization"
https://econ.duke.edu/uploads/assets/dje/2006/Lascelles.pdf
